eXtensible Host Controller Interface
Jump to navigationJump to search
eXtensible Host Controller Interface (xHCI) defines a register-level description of a Host Controller for Universal Serial bus (USB), which is capable of interfacing to USB 1.x, 2.0, and 3.0 compatible devices without the use of companion controllers.


Contents
1	Technical Details
2	Capability Registers
3	Operational Registers
4	Port Registers
5	Runtime Registers
6	Doorbell Registers
7	Virtual Registers
8	Chipsets with both EHC and xHC
9	External Links
Technical Details
The xHCI controller communicates with the operating system using memory mapped registers that can be located by searching the PCI configuration space for a device with a specific Class ID, Subclass ID, and Interface number. All xHCI controllers will have a Class ID of 0x0C, a Subclass ID of 0x03, and an Interface value of 0x30. The configuration space for this device will contain two Base Address Registers: BAR0 and BAR1. These two 32-bit address fields combine to create a single 64-bit address that points to the base address of the memory mapped registers for the controller.

Capability Registers
The capability registers are located at the address specified by the PCI configuration space.

Offset (Hex)	Name	Description
00	CAPLENGTH	Capability Register Length
01	RSVD	Reserved
02	HCIVERSION	Interface Version Number
04	HCSPARAMS1	Structural Parameters 1
08	HCSPARAMS2	Structural Parameters 2
0C	HCSPARAMS3	Structural Parameters 3
10	HCCPARAMS1	Capability Parameters
14	DBOFF	Doorbell Offset
18	RTSOFF	Runtime Registers Space Offset
1C	HCCPARMS2	Capability Parameters 2
Operational Registers
The operational registers are located after the capability registers in memory, and can be found by adding the CAPLENGTH field to the base address specified in the PCI configuration space.

Offset (Hex)	Name	Description
00	USBCMD	USB Command
04	USBSTS	USB Status
08	PAGESIZE	Page Size
14	DNCTRL	Device Notification Control
18	CRCR	Command Ring Control
30	DCBAAP	Device Context Base Address Array Pointer
38	CONFIG	Configure
Reading CRCR (or bits of it) provides '0'. Therefore, keep your own track of this address. Bit 0 of CRCR is the Consumer Cycle State (CCS) flag.

Port Registers
At the end of the operational registers (at offset 0x400!), each port on the root hub is assigned a set of registers. The number of entries in the port registers table is determined by the MaxPorts value in the HCSPARAMS1 register.

Offset (Hex)	Name	Description
00	PORTSC	Port Status and Control
04	PORTPMSC	Port Power Management Status and Control
08	PORTLI	Port Link Info
0C	reserved
Runtime Registers
The runtime registers are located after the operational registers in memory, and can be found by adding the RTSOFF field to the base address specified in the PCI configuration space.

Offset (Hex)	Name	Description
00	MFINDEX	Microframe Index
20	IR0-1023	Interrupter Register Sets
Starting at offset 0x20, each interrupter register set defines the event ring memory addresses needed to send and receive events and data to the USB bus.

Offset (Hex)	Name	Description
00	IMAN	Interrupter Management
04	IMOD	Interrupter Moderation
08	ERSTSZ	Event Ring Segment Table Size
10	ERSTBA	Event Ring Segment Table Base Address
18	ERDP	Event Ring Dequeue Pointer
Doorbell Registers
The doorbell registers are located after the runtime registers in memory, and can be found by adding the DBOFF field to the base address specified in the PCI configuration space. The length of the doorbell register table is based on the number of ports specified in the MaxSlots field in the HCSPARAMS1 register above. Each doorbell register is 32-bits long, and is used to notify the controller that there are pending operations to be performed on a specific device slot.

Virtual Registers
The xHCI specifications support "virtual" controllers that can be used to support multiple virtual machines running on a single physical machine. These registers must be configured and managed by the VM host, and effectively duplicate the registers above for use by the guest VMs.

Chipsets with both EHC and xHC
Some chipsets such as the Intel Panther Point (8086:1e31) feature both an EHC and xHC. Both controllers share the same set of ports and access to each port is determined by a hardware toggle (0 = EHC, 1 = xHC).

To switch a port to either the EHC or the xHC registers USB3_PSSEN (0xd0) and XUSB2PR (0xd8) must be written.

For example, to switch all available ports to the xHC (make sure the registers are actually present!):

#define USB3_PSSEN 0xd0
#define XUSB2PR    0xd8

char *pci_header = ...;
(u32 *)(pci_header + USB3_PSSEN) = 0xffff_ffff; // Enable SuperSpeed on USB3 ports
(u32 *)(pci_header + XUSB2PR)    = 0xffff_ffff; // Switch over USB2 ports
